# Animal welfare

"Animal welfare" is a rather broad cause area used extensively on
DLW. Donors who contribute a lot in animal welfare include Open
Philanthropy, the EA Animal Welfare Fund, and various funds
disbursed/directed by Animal Charity Evaluators.

## Broadest subcauses

### Factory farming

The "factory farming" subcause refers specifically to efforts that
interact directly with factory farming practices. The goal of this
effort could include research into better practices for farming
animals as well as outreach to corporations, legislative bodies, or
the general public to push for the adoption of better practices.

This does *not* include other efforts to reduce the demand for farmed
animals (such as diet change) or research into meat alternatives.

Undercover investigations of conditions on factory farms are placed
under "factory farming" even though they may be *inputs* to either
efforts to work within the factory farming system or diet change
efforts.

### Diet change

The "diet change" subcause includes efforts, mostly centered around
advocacy to individuals and organizations, to move towards diets that
reduce the exploitation of animals. This could include advocacy of
vegetarianism, veganism, reducetarianism, or heavytarianism (eating
heavier animals to cause less suffering per unit food consumed).

### Meat alternatives

The "meat alternatives" subcause focuses on efforts to build and
deploy alternatives to meat that do not require farming animals (at
least at the margin), but still have some of the "qualia" of meat
(taste, nutritional value, etc.).

### Wild animal welfare

Welfare of animals growing in the wild.

## Subcauses within factory farming: animal selection

### Chicken

Chicken are important in factory farming and have been the focus of
animal welfare efforts because of the large numbers of chicken per
unit mass of food produced as well as the conditions of chicken seeming
objectively bad. There are a few subtypes of chicken of interest:

* Broiler chicken: These are chicken raised specifically for
  meat. They are used for premium chicken meat.
* Layer chicken: These are chicken raised specifically for eggs. Once
  layer chicken reach the end of their life, they become "spent hens"
  and are generally used in less important meat.

Also, as a side note, male chicks are generally killed as soon as they
are born. This is definitely true for layer chicken. It is common but
not ubiquitous for broiler chicken.

### Fish

Like chicken and perhaps even more so than chicken, fish are a target
of animal welfare efforts because of the large numberr of fish per
unit mass of food produced.

## Subcauses within factory farming based on the type of change on the ground

### Cage-free

The idea behind "cage-free" is to not confine the animals being raised
in small cages. This is typically applied to chicken, but may also
apply to other poultry and sometimes to larger animals.

### Chick culling

Interventions related to "chick culling" apply to chicken and
sometimes to other poultry. Typical interventions involve early sex
selection so that the egg can be destroyed early enough (sex-selective
abortion).

## Subcauses based on mechanism of influence

### Research

Research could include research on the subjective experience of
animals or technological approaches to provide alternatives to
terrible experiences.

### Corporate campaign

Corporate campaigns are campaigns targeted at companies that either
own/operate factory farms or get supplies from factory farms. These
companies are in a position to set standards on factory farms that
they own, and/or impose standards on their suppliers.

### Legislative campaign

Legislative campaigns are targeted at creating, modifying, or
repealing legislations related to animal welfare.